# [Link to video.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BrN8c_0XI_I&list=PLVD25niNi0BkgQHyEFkuuBp_IQ4q67jIC)

### String Formatting

Suppose we want to print the date and we have variables for the month, day, and year.

One of the ways we could do that is to concatenate several strings together using the `+` operator. The integers get coerced into becoming strings when we use the `+` operater with a string and an int.

```java
String month = "March";
int day = 14;
int year = 2015;

System.out.println(month + " " + day + ", " + year); 
```

Although this works, it's difficult to read at a glance and easy to make spacing mistakes.

A better alternative is to use **string formatting**. String formatting involves using placeholders that get filled in with values of variables.

Placeholders begin with `%`. The placeholder for a string is `%s` and the placeholder for an integer is `%d` (the "d" stands for *decimal integer*).

When we're printing, we can use `System.out.printf()`, where the "f" stands for *formatting*. This method takes a formatted string, followed by the variables that get filled in. 

```java
String month = "March";
int day = 14;
int year = 2015;

System.out.printf("%s %d, %d\n", month, day, year); 
```

### Special Characters

Strings are made up of characters, which are typically letters, numbers, and spaces. There are also special characters, such as tabspace and newline that can appear in strings.

Special characters begin with a backslash `\`.

| Special Character                      | Code |
| -------------------------------------- | ---- |
| tabspace                               | `\t` |
| backspace                              | `\b` |
| carriage return (i.e. enter or return) | `\r` |
| newline                                | `\n` |


The backslash is called an **escape character**, since it "escapes" the next character.

Here is an example of how we can use a special character.

```java
// Prints "This is Line 1" on the one line, then "This is Line 2" on the next line
System.out.println("This is Line 1\nThis is Line 2");
```

However, ``println()`` is designed to print one line at a time, so it is preferable to do the following instead.

```java
System.out.println("This is Line 1");
System.out.println("This is Line 2");
```

We can also use the escape character to create strings that contain double quotation marks and characters that contain a single quotation mark. We cannot use single quotation marks for strings in Java; they are only for individual characters.

```java
System.out.println("\""); // Prints a double quotation mark
System.out.println("\"\""); // Prints two double quotation marks
System.out.println('\''); // Prints a single quotation mark
```

To create a string with a backslash, we put an escape character in front of it.

```java
System.out.println("\\"); // Prints a backslash
```

