# [Link to video.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PAfi9PEa74U&list=PLVD25niNi0BkgQHyEFkuuBp_IQ4q67jIC)

### While Loops

We would generally use a *while loop* when we know how to tell when the block of code should stop being running repeatedly.

Here is the general structure of a *while loop*.

```java
while (<condition>) {
    <statement>;
    ⋮
    <statement>;
}
```

A *while loop* does the following.

1. Checks to see whether the condition is met. If it isn't met, the block does not run.
2. If the condition is met, it runs the block of code (the content within the curly braces).
3. Repeats steps 1-2 repeatedly until the condition is no longer met in step 1.

Here's an example where we want the user to enter a integer from 1 to 10, and if they don't do that it will keep asking them.

```java
while (true) {
    System.out.print("Enter an integer from 1 to 10: ");
    int num = scanner.nextInt();  

    if (num > 10) {
        System.out.println("Too high!");
    } else if (num < 1) {
        System.out.println("Too low!");
    } else {
        System.out.println("Thanks!");
        break;
    }
}
```

The example above uses `while (true)` to keep the loop running until it reaches the condition with the `break`. This is often considered to be the beginner approach to loops. In general, the preferred way is to use a boolean expression instead of `true`. This will prevent the need to use `break`.

```java
Scanner scanner = new Scanner(System.in);
System.out.print("Enter a number from 1 to 10: ");
int num = scanner.nextInt();  
		
while (num < 1 || num > 10) {
    if (num > 10) {
        System.out.println("Too high!");
    } else if (num < 1) {
        System.out.println("Too low!");
    } 
  
    System.out.print("Enter a number from 1 to 10: ");
    num = scanner.nextInt();  
}

System.out.println("Thanks!");
```


### Break and Continue

At any point in a loop, we can use the keyword `break` to get out of the loop. The keyword `break` is somewhat controversial in computer science since some programmers consider it bad form. I am not one of them. We may use it in this course.

The keyword `continue` is slightly less controversial, but again, I am okay with you using it in this course. When a loop is run and it reaches a `continue`, it skips to the end of the current iteration.
