# [Link to video.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HlUnv-XnQFk&list=PLVD25niNi0BmTEl0Ek3UtHR41o5kURAh8)

### Static Methods

A static method is a method that belongs to a class whereas a non-static method is a method that belongs to an **instance** of a class. An instance is an object that is constructed from a class's constructor. 

Static and non-static methods are used in different programming paradigms. Static methods typically perform a routine as a part of a **procedural program**, whereas non-static methods are typically used to create **object-oriented programs**. We're going to learn more about these later this unit.

We can call a static method by writing `Class.` in front of the function call (replace "Class" with the name of the class). If we don't include `Class.`, it will assume the method is inside of the class it was called from. The function name `foo()` is a placeholder name that is commonly used in computer science when showing examples.

```java
public class Main {

    public static void foo() { // static method (i.e. class method)
        System.out.println("foo");
    }
	
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Main.foo(); // prints "foo"    
        foo(); // prints "foo"
    }
} 
```

Let's look at how to call a non-static method. 
1. Create a non-static method by omitting the keyword `static`.
2. Create an instance of `Main` to call the method.
3. Call the method on the instance.

```java
public class Main {

    public void foo() { // non-static method
        System.out.println("foo");
    }
  
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Main m = new Main(); // m is an instance of Main
        m.foo(); // prints "foo"
    }
} 
```

`Main m` is declaring an instance called `m` that belongs to the `Main` class. `new Main()` is calling the constructor that will create `m`. Every class has a public constructor by default, so we don't need to create one ourselves.


If we don't create an instance, we can't call a non-static method.

```java
public class Main {

    public void foo() { // non-static method
        System.out.println("foo");
    }
  
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        foo(); // throws error
        Main.foo(); // throws error
    }
} 
```
