# [Link to video.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=40GndhpTAnA&list=PLVD25niNi0BkgQHyEFkuuBp_IQ4q67jIC)

### Variables and Constants

A **variable** is value that can change over time. 

A **constant** is a value that cannot change over time. Constants in Java should have the modifier `final`, which prevents us from reassigning its value in the same program.

A **data type** is the kind of data that a variable can store. Once we declare a variable or constant to be a specific data type, that variable or constant can only store values of that data type. There are many built-in data types, but we can also create our own data types using classes.

All data types are either primitive or composite. A **primitive data type** (a.k.a. a **basic data type**) represents a single piece of information. If a data type isn't primitive, it is a **composite data type**. Whether a data type is primitive or composite depends on the programming language. 

Working with primitive values is usually faster than working with composite values, because Java stores primitive values in a special way that makes memory and speed optimizations possible.

Here are all seven primitive data types in Java. 

| Data Type | Explanation |
| --- | --- |
| `int` | Any integer between -2<sup>31</sup> and 2<sup>31</sup>–1 (inclusive). |
| `bool` | The values `true` or `false`.  |
| `float` | Any decimal number that can be represented in 32 bits using IEEE 754. |
| `double` | Any decimal number that can be represented in 64 bits using IEEE 754. |
| `char` | One ASCII character in UTF-8. It is enclosed in single quotation marks `'`. |
| `wchar_t` | A "wide" character. One Unicode character in UTF-16. It is enclosed in single quotation marks with an L-prefix L`'`. The "L" stands for "long" since it behaves similarly to a `long int`. |
| `void` | A "valueless" value. |

When we are mentioning a variable or a constant for the first time, we **declare** it by writing its **data type** and choosing a name for the variable. We can choose to **assign** a value to the variable on the same line as the declaration, or we can choose to do this on a separate line.

For example, these two pieces of code accomplish essentially the same thing.

``cpp
int height;  // declaration 
height = 10;  // assignment
```

```cpp
int height = 10;  // declaration and assignment combined
```

If we would like to declare more than one variable or constant of the same data type, we may combine them all onto one line. 

For example, these two pieces of code accomplish essentially the same thing.

```java
int height;  
int weight; 
int age;
```

```java
int height, weight, age; // three declarations combined in one line
```
