# [Link to video.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uNMSgcuxWqQ&list=PLVD25niNi0BliJx0Rnr1DB6HdsL5oy5kJ)

### Naming Functions

Recall how to create functions from [1.1 Introduction to C++](https://github.com/MissStrong/ICS4U/blob/main/Unit%201/C%2B%2B/1.1%20Introduction%20to%20C%2B%2B.md).

> When defining a function, we would write the following, in order.    
> 1. the return type (e.g. `int`, `string`, etc.) (or write `void` if the function doesn't return anything)
> 2. the name of the function
> 3. the parameters of the function enclosed in parentheses
> 4. a left curly brace `{`
> 5. the body of the function
> 6. a right curly brace `}`

Here are the additional rules for naming our own functions:

* It can be a word or a phrase.
* It should contain start with a verb. 
* The first character is an lower case letter. The name cannot begin with a number.
* If there is more than one word, all other words begins with a capital (e.g. `getItem()`).
* There are only letters and numbers. There are no underscores or other special symbols.

Here is an example of some custom functions.

```cpp
void print(string s) {
  cout << s << endl;
}

void print(int n) {
  cout << n << endl;
}
```

We are allowed to use the same function name for multiple functions in the program as long as the parameters are different data types or there is a different number of paramaters. This is called **function overloading**.

### Functions in Math versus Functions in Computer Science

Let's review functions in a bit more detail. Many of you have already taken, or are currently taking, the Grade 11 math course *Functions* (MCR3U) or *Functions and Applications* (MCF3M).

In math, a relation is a relationship involving one or more variables. A function is a relation in which each independent variable value has only one corresponding dependent variable value.

For example, *f(x) = x<sup>2</sup> + 4* is a function, in which:
* *f* is the name of the function
* *f(x)* is the dependent variable
* *x* is the independent variable
* *x<sup>2</sup> + 4* is how to compute the value of the dependent variable given the value for the independent variable.

Functions can have more than one independent variable. For example, *f(x, y, z) = 4x + 2y - 1/z* is also a function.

Functions in computer science may look different to functions in math, but they are fundamentally similar.

| . | Math Example | C++ Example |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Function | f(x, y, z) = 4x + 2y - 1/z | `double foo(double x, double y, double z) {`<br></br>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;`return 4*x + 2*y - 1.0/z;`<br></br>`}` |
| Function name | *f* | `foo` |
| Parameters (Independent Variables) | *x*, *y*, *z* | `x`, `y`, `z` |
| Return Value (Value of Dependent Variable) | *4x + 2y - 1/z* | `4*x + 2*y - 1.0/z` |
| Other Information |  | `double` (before `foo`): The function returns a double.<br/></br> `double` (before `x`, `y`, and `z`): The parameters `x`, `y`, and `z` are double values. |
| Example | *f(7, -3, 1) = 4(7) + 2(-3) - 1/1 = 28 - 6 - 1 = 21* | `double a = foo(7, -3, 1)`<br/></br>`// the value of a is initialized to 21.0` |

In math, *f*, *g*, and *h* are generic names for functions. In computer science, `foo`, `bar`, and `baz` are generic names for functions. We can also come up with our own dummy names for functions that aren't supposed to be meaningful. I'm quite fond of `bloop`.

In computer science, **parameters** are the variable names used in a function. **Arguments** are the values of the parameters we use when we are calling a function. In the example at the bottom of the previous table, the parameters are x, y, and z, and the arguments are 7, -3, and 1.
