# [Link to video.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6bNki4l4WPo&list=PLVD25niNi0Blds9kjuux3nj9N9n5nBpMr)

### Integer Overflow and Underflow

Recall that the value of an `int` can only be from `INT_MIN` (-2<sup>31</sup>) up to `INT_MAX` (2<sup>31</sup>–1). We can access `INT_MAX` and `INT_MIN` by including `<climits>`.
If we try to add, subtract, or multiply integers to get a result that is outside of that range, the result will seem nonsensical.

```cpp
cout << 2000000000 * 2 << endl; // prints -294967296
cout << -2000000000 * 2 << endl; // prints 294967296
```

Why did we get these results? It's because as soon as the result of a calculation exceeds `INT_MAX`, it becomes `INT_MIN` and the calculation continues. Similarly, as soon as the result exceeds `INT_MIN`, it becomes `INT_MAX` and the calculation continues.

```java
cout << INT_MAX + 1 << endl; // prints -2147483648, which is INT_MIN
cout << INT_MIN - 1 << endl; // prints 2147483647, which is Integer.MAX_VALUE
```

### Long Long Integers

If we're dealing with numbers in the billions and we don't want to worry about integer overflow and underflow, we can use `long long` instead of `int`. Long long integers go from `LLONG_MIN` (-2<sup>63</sup>, around 9 quintillion) up to `LLONG_MAX` (2<sup>63</sup>–1). 

2<sup>31</sup> is approximately 2 billion whereas 2<sup>63</sup> is approximately 9 quintillion, or 9 billion billion. 

In addition to `long long` (64 bits), there's `long int` (32 bits), `short int` (16 bits), `long` (same as `long int`), and `short` (same as `short int`), among other combinations. The name has nothing to do with the [Long Long Man commercials](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6-1Ue0FFrHY).

### Literals

If we write out some digits, C++ will automatically treat it as an **integer literal** (it's literally a bunch of digits forming an integer). To make it a **long long literal**, we can append an `L`.

```cpp
long n = 3000000000L; // 3 billion (higher than INT_MAX)

cout << 2000000000L * 2 << endl; // prints 4000000000
cout << -2000000000L * 2 << endl; // prints -4000000000
```

Now we only have to deal with overflow and underflow if we're working with numbers in the quintillions.

```cpp
cout << 5000000000000000000L * 2 << endl; // prints -8446744073709551616
cout << -5000000000000000000L * 2 << endl; // prints 8446744073709551616
```

### Unsigned Integers

Both `int` and `long long` include negative and positive values. If we want to only have non-negative values, we can use `unsigned` to shift the range so that the maximum value is twice as high and the minimum is 0. The "sign" in `unsigned` refers to the lack of positive (+) or negative (-) sign. 

To make an unsigned literal, append a "U". If there's already another letter at the back, the order of the letters does not matter.

```cpp
unsigned int n = 10U;
unsigned long long m = 10LU; // 10UL works too
```

```cpp
cout << INT_MAX << endl; // max value of int (~2 billion)
cout << UINT_MAX << endl; // max value of unsigned int (~4 billon)


cout << LLONG_MAX << endl; // max value of long long (~9 quintillion)
cout << ULLONG_MAX << endl; // max value of unsigned long long (~18 quintillion)
```
