# [Link to video.](TODO)

### Recursion

Many of you have already taken, or are currently taking, the Grade 11 math course *Functions* (MCR3U) or *Functions and Applications* (MCF3M).

In math, a **recursive function** is a function whose definition includes the function itself. It requires at least one **base case**, which determines the edge of the domain.

In computer science, a **recursive function** is a function that calls itself within the body of the function. The base cases determine when the method stops running.

> For fun:
> 
> Search the word *recursion* on Google. What happens?
> 
> [See image](../Images/Recursion.png).

### Factorials!

Another classic example of a recursive function is the factorial operation, which is denoted by an exclamation mark. The value *n!* is the product of all the natural numbers up to and including *n*. 

For example, *5! = 5 × 4 × 3 × 3 × 2 × 1*.

The base cases are  *1! = 1 * and  *0! = 1 *. The reason  *0! = 1* is the same reason why any non-zero number to the 0<sup>th</sup> power is  *1 * – it's an empty product.

The full definition of *n!* is  *n! = n × (n-1) × ... × 1, 0! = 1! = 1*, *n ∈ ℕ*. 

The symbol *ℕ* represents the set of natural numbers. However, it is debatable among mathematicians whether 0 is considered to be a natural number. We can often figure out from context which definition of "natural numbers" is used.

We could write a method to calculate *n!* using a loop like this:

```java
/**
 * This method takes an integer n and returns the value of n!
 *
 * @param n a non-negative integer
 * @return n!
 */
public static int factorial(int n) {
  int answer = 1;
  while (n > 0) {
    answer *= n;
    n--;
  }
  return answer;
}
```

Or, we could write it using recursion like this:

```java
/**
 * This method takes an integer n and returns the value of n!
 *
 * @param n a non-negative integer
 * @return n!
 */
public static int factorial(int n) {
  if (n == 0 || n == 1) return 1;
  else return n * factorial(n - 1); // this uses the identity n! = n*(n-1)!
}
```

### Fibonacci Sequence

One of the most classic examples of recursion is the Fibonacci sequence: 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 34...

The definition is *f(n) = f(n-1) + f(n-2), f(1) = f(2) = 1*, *n ∈ ℕ*. The base cases are *f(1) = 1* and *f(2) = 1*, which indicate that the first two **terms** are both 1. All other terms are calculated by adding the previous two terms.

We could write a method to calculate the n<sup>th</sup> Fibonacci number using a loop like this:

```java
/**
 * Takes a positive integer n and returns the nth number in the Fibonacci sequence.
 *
 * @param n a positive integer
 * @return the nth Fibonacci number; if n isn't a positive integer, it returns -1
 */
public static int fibonacci(int n) {
  if (n == 1 || n == 2) return 1;
  int previous1 = 1; // the n-1th term
  int previous2 = 1; // the n-2th term
  for (int i = 3; i < n; i++) {
    previous1 += previous2;
    previous2 = previous1 - previous2;
  }
  return previous1 + previous2;
}
```

Or, we could write it using recursion like this:

```java
/**
 * Takes a positive integer n and returns the nth number in the Fibonacci sequence.
 *
 * @param n a positive integer
 * @return the nth Fibonacci number; if n isn't a positive integer, it returns -1
 */
public static int fibonacci(int n) {
  if (n == 1 || n == 2) return 1;
  else return fibonacci(n - 1) + fibonacci(n - 2);
}
```

How does this work? Let's **trace** `fibonacci(4)` to see what happens. The => symbol is used to indicate what happens next.

`fibonacci(4)`    
=> `fibonacci(3) + fibonacci(2)`    
=> `fibonacci(2) + fibonacci(1) + fibonacci(2)`    
=> `1 + 1 + 1`    
=> `3`

Let's try again with `fibonacci(6)`.

`fibonacci(6)`    
=> `fibonacci(5) + fibonacci(4)`    
=> `fibonacci(4) + fibonacci(3) + fibonacci(4)`   
=> `fibonacci(3) + fibonacci(2) + fibonacci(3) + fibonacci(4)`   
=> `fibonacci(2) + fibonacci(1) + fibonacci(2) + fibonacci(3) + fibonacci(4)`    
=> `1 + 1 + 1 + fibonacci(3) + fibonacci(4)`   
=> `3 + fibonacci(3) + fibonacci(4)`   
=> `3 + fibonacci(2) + fibonacci(1) + fibonacci(4)`   
=> `3 + 1 + 1 + fibonacci(4)`   
=> `5 + fibonacci(4)`   
=> `5 + fibonacci(3) + fibonacci(2)`   
=> `5 + fibonacci(2) + fibonacci(1) + fibonacci(2)`   
=> `5 + 1 + 1 + 1`   
=> `8`   


### Issues with Recursion

Recursion can be used to create efficient programs, but it can also be used to create inefficient programs. In the case of Fibonacci numbers, the number of recursive calls grows exponentially as the Fibonacci number increases.

There is also the issue of infinite recursion. Similar to infinite loops, an infinite recursion never terminates. This often occurs when the base cases do not actually cover all bases.

Sometimes, recursive functions can be rewritten in closed form (i.e. an expression that doesn't involve recursion). For example, this table of values can be expressed in closed form as *f(n) = 2n + 1, n ∈ ℕ* or recursively as *f(n) = f(n-1) + 2, f(1) = 3, n ∈ ℕ*. When closed form is possible, it is more efficient to implement it without recursion.

| n | f(n) |
| --- | --- |
| 1 | 3 |
| 2 | 5 |
| 3 | 7 |
| 4 | 9 |
| 5 | 11 |
