# [Link to video.](TODO)

### Objects

An **object** is an instance (i.e. a concrete occurrence) of a class. For example, if we have the string `"Hello World!"` somewhere our your program, it would be a `String` object. 

A **class** is a blueprint for an object. It contains the properties of the object, including variables (**fields**) and functions (methods). A class has at least one constructor, which shares the same name as the class and doesn't have any return type (not even `void`). In Replit, every class has to be in its own Java file and the filename has to match the name of the class.

### Classes

Here is an example of a custom class `Person` in a file *Person.java*.

```java
public class Person {

  public String name;
  public String gender;
  public int age;

  public Person() { // this is a constructor
    this.name = ""; // "this" refers to an object in the class, which allows us to access the fields
    this.gender = "";
    this.age = -1;
  }

  public Person(String n, String g, int a) { // this is also a constructor
    this.name = n;
    this.gender = g;
    this.age = a;
  }
} 
```

There are two versions of the constructor `Person()`. The first one doesn't take any parameters and just sets the three fields (`name`, `gender`, and `age`) to some default values. The second one takes three parameters and sets the fields to these values. We can choose which one to call when we create an instance of a `Person`.

The `this` keyword is a reference to an object from the class. We can use it to access non-static variables (the fields). This is convenient when we need to distinguish between a field and a parameter that shares the same name.

```java
  public Person(String n, String g, int a) { 
    name = n; // this works
    gender = g;
    age = a;
  }
} 
```

```java
  public Person(String name, String gender, int age) { 
    name = name; // this doesn't work
    gender = gender;
    age = age;
  }
} 
```

In `Main`, we can create a `Person` using either of the two constructors and access the fields we initized.

```java

public class Main {
	
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    Person nancy = new Person("Nancy", "Female", 57);

    System.out.println(nancy.name); // prints "Nancy"
    System.out.println(nancy.gender); // prints "Female"
    System.out.println(nancy.age); // prints "57"
  }
} 
```

### Constructors

To create an object belonging to a particular class, we often need to use the `new` keyword along with the constructor method. For example, to create an integer array list object, you can use `ArrayList<Integer> intArrayList = new ArrayList()`. 

Some classes have simpler ways of creating objects, without directly calling the constructor. For example, to create a `String` object, we don't need to do `String s = new String();`, we can instantiate and initialize it at the same time: `String s = "12345";`. Some classes have operations that call the constructor method for us. For example, to create an array of integers, we don't do `Array<Integer> intArray = new Array(5);` (this actually won't work), we would do `int[] intArray = int[5]` instead.

Since primitive data types don't belong to any class, we don't need to use the `new` keyword to create them.

If we try `Math m = new Math();`, it will throw an exception. The reason that we cannot create a `Math` object is that the constructor in the `Math` class is `private`. When we create our own classes, we can prevent a user from creating an object belonging to you class by making the class's constructor `private`. By default, every class we create has a `public` constructor with a blank body if it is not explicitly written in the body of the class.
