# [Link to video.](TODO)

### Inheritance
Inheritance can be referred to as a "is-a" association and is a very strong association. Unlike aggregation and composition, the subclass inherits all the fields and methods from the superclass. 

There are two cases:
1. The "superclass" is an interface, and the subclass `implements` it.
2. The superclass is a class, and the subclass `extends` it.


### Implementing an Interface
An interface is typically a category of classes. For example, `List` is an interface and the `ArrayList` class (among other types of lists `implements` it. Objects cannot be created from an interface, so there is no such thing as a plain `List` object.

An Interface contains methods with empty bodies, and no fields. When a subclass `implements` an interface, it must include the definitions of all the methods from the interface. You can use the keyword `@Override` to document this. Both method overloading (from the previous lesson) and method overriding are types of **polymorphism**: methods existing in many forms.

Here is an example of a custom class that implements a custom interface. 

```java
public interface Shape {    
  
  public double perimeter(); 
  public double area();
}
```
```java
public class Rectangle implements Shape {
  
  public final int numSides = 4;
  public final double length;
  public final double width;
    
  public Rectangle(double s1, double s2) {
    length = Math.max(s1, s2);
     width = Math.min(s1, s2);
  }
    
  @Override
  public double perimeter() {
    return 2 * (length + width);
  }
    
  @Override
  public double area() {
    return length * width;
  }  
}

```

When you're creating an instance of a subclass, you can declare the type as the interface or the superclass.

For example, these two lines accomplish essentially the same thing.

```java
List<Integer> arraylist = new ArrayList();
```

```java
ArrayList<Integer> arraylist = new ArrayList();
```

### Extending a Class
You've seen the keyword `extends` in JSwing programs. The first line of the class in these programs is `public class Main extends JFrame {`. The `JFrame` class is what allows your program to display a GUI form using `JFrame` components.

Similarly to a method in a subclass of an interface, a method in a subclass of a class can be overridden, too. 

You can also leave the body of a method in the superclass empty by using the keyword `abstract` on the method and on the class. Abstract methods must be `public` and non-static.

Here is an example of a custom class that extends a custom abstract class

```java
public abstract class Shape {
  public abstract double perimeter(); 
  public abstract double area();
}
```
```java
public class Rectangle extends Shape {

  public final double length;
  public final double width;
    
  public Rectangle(double s1, double s2) {
    numSides = 4;
    length = Math.max(s1, s2);
    width = Math.min(s1, s2);
   }
    
  public double perimeter() {
    return 2 * (length + width);
  }
    
  public double area() {
    return length * width;
  }  
}
```
