## Disclaimer

All components in this course are the property of the Ministry of Education. At the time of creation, all components of this course - including web links and multimedia resources - were functioning, and were deemed to be appropriate for use in Ontario schools. Because there are many web links used in the course, and given the nature of the Internet, one can expect that links will, from time to time, disappear. It is expected that the teachers responsible for the delivery of this course within their district school boards will find and insert appropriate substitute links.

The resources used in this course are selected by the course writers and have not necessarily been formally approved by the Ministry.

Every effort has been made to provide students with all content necessary for completion of the course within the content of the course. In some cases, however (textbooks, novels, anthologies, videotapes, some software), the cost of procuring copyright permission was prohibitive, or bandwidth issues prevented inclusion of material in the course. In these cases, it is the responsibility of the school in which the student is registered to provide the necessary materials for the student. Where the school is unable to provide this material, teachers responsible for the delivery of this course within their district school boards may provide substitute materials that meet the necessary expectations. All courses include a list of materials to be supplied by schools. This list is found in the course information unit of the course.

The content (i.e., photographs, images, illustrations, sound and video recordings, graphics, artwork, text, animation) contained in this course is protected by copyright laws. Every effort has been made to locate copyright holders of materials included in this course in order to obtain their permission to publish it. Any errors or omissions should be brought to the attention of e-Learning Ontario so that they may be corrected.
