# [Link to video.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q4C65gchMk4&list=PLVD25niNi0BkgQHyEFkuuBp_IQ4q67jIC)

### Arrays vs. Lists

Depending on what programming language you used in your Grade 11 computer science course, you would have either learned about **arrays**, **lists**, or both.

Arrays and lists are both data structures that store ordered sets of values, but there are a few major differences between them:

* arrays have fixed lengths; lists are dynamic in length
* arrays could be immutable; lists are always mutable
* arrays tend to have values of one data type; lists tend to allow values of more than one data type

Here is a summary of what lists and arrays are called in various languages.

| Language   | List        | Array                         |
| ---------- | ----------- | ----------------------------- |
| C          | linked list | array                         |
| Turing     | linked list | array                         |
| C++        | list        | array                         |
| C#         | list        | array                         |
| Python     | list        | tuple (pronounced "too-pull") |
| JavaScript | array list  | array                         |
| Java       | array list  | array                         |

Java has an `Array` structure and an `ArrayList` structure. This lesson will be on arrays. We'll learn about array lists in a future lesson.

### Declaring and Initializing Arrays

In order to use array methods in a Java program, we need to import the `java.util.Arrays` package.

At the top of the file, put `import java.util.Arrays;` or `import java.util.*;`. The `*` is called a wildcard, and here it is used to import all the classes from `java.util`, which includes `java.util.Arrays`.

There are two common ways to initialize arrays.

1. Declare and initialize the array on the same line.
   Here is an example.

```java
String[] officeCast = {"Michael", "Dwight", "Jim", "Pam", "Stanley", "Phyllis", "Meredith", "Creed", "Kevin", "Oscar", "Angela", "Ryan", "Kelly", "Toby"};
```

2. Declare the array, then fill the elements one by one.
   Here is an example.

```java
String[] officeCast = new String[14];
officeCast[0] = "Michael";
officeCast[1] = "Dwight";
⋮
officeCast[13] = "Toby";
```

In the first example:

* `String[]` indicates that every element in the array will be a string
* `officeCast` is the name of the array
* the fourteen elements of the array are `"Michael"`, `"Dwight"`, ..., and `"Toby"`

In the second example:

* `String[]` indicates that every element in the array will be a string
* `officeCast` is the name of the array
* `new` is the keyword that is used to create a new object, which is an array (we'll learn about this in more detail in a later lesson)
* `String[14]` indicates that there will be fourteen elements in the array
* `officeCast[...] = ...;` initializes the element at that index (starting at 0) to be that value

When declaring the array separately, we are allowed to put the `[]` before or after the name of the array, and we may also put a space before them.

For example, the following individual lines of code all accomplish the same thing:

`String[] arrayName = new String[10];`    
`String [] arrayName = new String[10];`    
`String arrayName[] = new String[10];`    
`String arrayName [] = new String[10];`

### main(String[] args)

You may have been wondering since the beginning of the course what the `String[] args` in the `main` method means. Now you know: the `main` method takes an array of strings called `args` (short for *arg*uments). When we run Java files using a terminal we can call the `main` method and give it an array of arguments, although we won't be doing that as a part of this course. 

### Printing Arrays

If we declare an array called `arrayName` and run `System.out.println(arrayName);`, it will print a hexadecimal value, which indicates the array's address in memory.

In order to print the contents of the array, we can import `java.util.Arrays` and use `System.out.println(Arrays.toString(arrayName));`. 

### Accessing Array Elements

To access an element in an array at index `i`, we can use `arrayName[i];`.

```cpp
string officeCast[] = {"Michael", "Dwight", "Jim", "Pam", "Stanley", "Phyllis", "Meredith", "Creed", "Kevin", "Oscar", "Angela", "Ryan", "Kelly", "Toby"};

Systen.out.println(officeCast[5]) // prints Phyllis
```

### Modifying Array Elements

The notation for modifying individual elements is the same as accessing values.

```cpp
string officeCast[] = {"Michael", "Dwight", "Jim", "Pam", "Stanley", "Phyllis", "Meredith", "Creed", "Kevin", "Oscar", "Angela", "Ryan", "Kelly", "Toby"};

officeCast[11] = "Gabe"; // changes the string at index 11 to "Gabe"

Systen.out.println(officeCast[11]); // prints "Gabe" instead of "Ryan"
```
