# [Link to video.]

### Lambda Functions

A **lambda function** in Java is a short block of code that takes in parameters and returns a value, without needing to define a full method. Here is the syntax:

```java
(parameters) -> expression
(parameters) -> {statements;}
```
In Python, lambda functions can take only one statement; but, in Java, lambda functions can take many statements.

### Method References

We can use a **method reference** instead of a lambda operator when the statement is a method call with one input. Here is the syntax:

```java
Class::methodName;
```

`::` is the **method reference operator**.

Here is an example comparing a lambda function to its equivalent method reference.

Lambda function:

```java
x -> System.out.println(x)
```

Method reference:

```java
System.out::println
```

### Streams

`Stream` is an interface. Its documentation is here: https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/stream/Stream.html

A **stream** is a sequence of elements. We can create a stream using the non-static method `.stream()` on a `Collection`, a `File`, and other compatible data types.

We can interate on a stream using `.forEach()`. The parameter can be a lambda function or a method reference.

```java
List<String> names = List.of("Alice", "Bob", "Charlie", "David");

names.stream().forEach(System.out::println); // prints ["Alice", "Bob", "Charlie", "David"]
```

We can also use the static method `Arrays.stream()` on arrays.

```java
int[] nums = {1, 2, 3, 4};
Arrays.stream(nums).forEach(System.out::println);
```

We can also create a stream using `Stream.of()`. It we include `import java.util.stream.Stream;`

```java
Stream.of(3, 5, 9).forEach(System.out::println);
```

### Filter

Filtering involves keeping items based on something in common and removing the remaining items. We can use `.filter()` on a stream with a lambda function or a method reference.

```java
Set<String> names = Set.of("Alice", "Bob", "Charlie", "David");

names.stream().filter(name -> name.startsWith("C")).forEach(System.out::println); // prints Charlie
```

### Map

Mapping involves applying a function to every item. We can use `.map()` on a stream with a lambda function or a method reference.

```java
List<Integer> numbers = List.of(1, 2, 3, 4);

numbers.stream().map(num -> num * 10).forEach(System.out::println); // prints 10, 20, 30, 40 on separate lines
```
