# [Link to video.]

### Recursive Functions vs. Non-Recursive Functions

Consider the following non-recursive function: *f(n) = 2n + 1*, *n ∈ ℕ* represented in this table of values:

| n   | f(n)   |
| --- | ---    |
| 1   | 3      |
| 2   | 5      |
| 3   | 7      |
| 4   | 9      |
| 5   | 11     |
| ⋮   | ⋮      |
| n   | 2n + 1 |


The symbol *ℕ* represents the set of natural numbers. However, it is debatable among mathematicians whether *0* is considered to be a natural number. We can often figure out from context which definition of "natural numbers" is used. In the function above, *n=0* is omitted so *0* is not considered a natural number in this function.

The function *f(n) = 2n + 1*, *n ∈ ℕ* tells us that if we pick a natural number *n* as the input, the output is determined by doubling *n* and adding *1* to it.

### Recursion

In math, a **recursive function** is a function whose definition includes the function itself. It requires at least one **base case**, which determines the edge of the domain.

We can re-write the previous example as a recursive function by looking **down** the table instead of **across**. 

We can re-define this function recursively by considering the sequence 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, ... (and so on). We observe that starts at 3, and each term (except the first one) is 2 more than the previous term. Therefore, we can write the function recursively like this: *f(1) = 3*, *f(n) = f(n-1) + 2*, *n>1*. We typically omit *n ∈ ℕ* since the default domain in a recursive function is the set of natural numbers.

The **base case** is *f(1) = 3*. This tells us where the function starts (the edge of the domain is *n=1*).

The **recursive case** is *f(n) = f(n-1) + 2, n>1*. This tells us that each term (except `n=1`) is determined by adding 2 to the previous term.


### Factorials!

A classic example of a recursive function is the factorial operation, which is denoted by an exclamation mark. The value *n!* is the product of all the natural numbers up to and including *n*. 

For example, *5! = 5 × 4 × 3 × 3 × 2 × 1*.

The base cases are  *1! = 1 * and  *0! = 1 *. The reason  *0! = 1* is the same reason why any non-zero number to the 0<sup>th</sup> power is  *1* – it's an empty product.

The full definition of *n!* is  *0! = 1! = 1*, *n! = n × (n-1) × ... × 1*, *n > 1*. 



### Fibonacci Sequence

Another classic examples of recursion is the Fibonacci sequence: 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 34, ...

The definition is *f(1) = f(2) = 1*, *f(n) = f(n-1) + f(n-2)*, *n > 2*. The base cases are *f(1) = 1* and *f(2) = 1*, which indicate that the first two terms are both 1. All other terms are calculated by adding the previous two terms.
